CONCEPT: CN
SOURCE: PDF

[Page 1]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
MODULE 1
Introduction to Internet of Things: Introduction, Physical design of IOT, Logical Design of IOT, IOT
enabling technologies, IOT Levels & Deployment Templates.
Introduction to Internet of Things
1.1 Introduction
Internet of Things (Io T) comprises things that have unique identities and are connected to the
internet.
  Existing devises, such as networked computers or 4G enabled mobile phones already have
some form of unique identities and are also connected to the internet, the focus on Io T in
the configuration, control and networking via the internet of devices or things, that are
traditionally not associated with the Internet. These include devices such as thermostats,
utility meters, a blue tooth- connected headset, irrigation pumps and sensor or control
circuits for an electric car s engine
  Experts forecast that by the year 2020 there will be a total of 50 billion devices/ things
connected to the internet.
  The scope of Io T is not limited to just connected things (Devices, appliance, machines) to
the Internet.
  Applications on Io T networks extract and create information from lower-level data by
filtering, processing, categorizing, condensing and contextualizing the data.
  The information obtained is then organized and structured to infer knowledge about the
system and or its user, its environment and its operations and progress towards its
objectives, allowing a smarter performance.
Definition and characteristics of Io T:
Definition
A dynamic global network infrastructure with self   configuring based on standard and
interoperable communication protocols where physical and virtual  things  have
identified, physical attributes, and virtual personalities and use intelligent interfaces, often
communicate data associated with users and their environment.

[Page 2]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Characteristics
  Dynamic and self-Adapting:
Io T devices and systems may have the capability to dynamically adapt with the changing
contexts and take actions based on their operating condition.Ex: Surveillance cameras
can adapt their modes based on whether it is day or night.
  Self   Configuring:
Io T devices may have self-Configuring capability allowing a large number of devices
to work together to provide certain functionality.
  Interoperable communication protocols:
Io T Devices may support a number of interoperable communication protocols and can
communicate with other devices and also with the infrastructure.
  Unique Identity:
Each Io T devices has a unique identity and a unique identifier. IP address, URI). Io T
systems may have intelligent interfaces which adapt based on the context, allow
communication with users and the environment contexts.
  Integrated into information network:
Io T devices are usually integrated into the information network that allows them to
communicate and exchange data with other devices and systems.
1.2 Physical Design of Io T
1.2.1 Things of Io T
The  Things  in Io T usually refers to Io T devices which have unique identities and can
perform remote sensing, Actuating and monitoring capabilities. Io T devices can exchange
data with other connected devices and applications (directly or indirectly), or collect data
from other devices and process the data locally or send the data to Centralized servers or
cloud-based applications back ends for processing the data or from some tasks locally and
other task within the Io T infrastructure, based on temporal and space constraints (ie:
Memory, processing calibrators, communication latencies and speed and deadlines).
Figure 1.1 shows a block diagram of a typical Io T device, An Io T device may consist of
several interfaces connections to other devices, both wired and wireless. These include I)
Io T interfaces for sensors II) interfaces for internet connectivity III) memory and storage
interfaces IV) audio video interfaces. An Io T Device can collect various types of data from
the the onboard or attached sensors, such as temperature, humidity, light intensity.
Io T devices can also be varied types, for instance, wearable sensors, smart watches, LED
light automobiles and industrial machines. Almost all Io T devices generate data in Some
form or the other which when processed by Data Analytics systems leads to Useful
information to guide further actions locally or remotely. Figure 1.2 shows different types
of Io T devices.

[Page 3]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Figure 1.1 Generic block diagram of an Io T Device
Figure 1.2 Io T devices
1.2.2 Io T Protocol
Link Layer:
Link Layer protocols determine how the data is physically sent over the networks physical
layer or medium (example copper wire, electrical cable, or radio wave). The Scope of The
Link Layer is the Last Local Network connections to which host is attached. Host on the
same link exchange data packets over the link layer using the link layer protocol. Link
layer determines how the packets are coded and signaled by the hardware device over the
medium to which the host is attached.
802.3 Ethernet:
802.3 is a collection of wired Ethernet standards for the link layer. For example,
802.3 10BASE5 Ethernet that uses coaxial cable as a shared medium, 802.3.i is
standard for 10 BASET Ethernet over copper twisted pair connection, Standards
provide data rates from 10 Mb/s to 40 gigabits per second and the higher. The
shared medium in Ethernet can be a coaxial cable, twisted pair wire or and Optical

[Page 4]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
fiber. Shared medium carries the communication for all the devices on the network.
802.11- WI-FI:
IEEE 802.11 is a collection of wireless Local area network. (WLAN)
communication standards, including extensive descriptions of the link layer. For
example, 802.11a operate in the 5 GHz band, 802.11b and 802.11g operate in the
2.4 GHz band. 802.11ac operates in the 5G hertz band.
802.16 Wi MAX:
IEEE 802.16 is a collection of wireless broadband and Standards, including
extensive descriptions for the link layer also called Wi MAX wimax standard
provides a data rates from from 1.5 Mb/s to 1Gb/s the recent update provides data
rates of hundred megabits per second for mobile station.
802.15.4 LR-WPAN:
IEEE 802.15.4 is a collection of standards for low-rate wireless personal area network
(LR- WPAN). These standard forms the basis of specifications for high level
communication Zigbee. LR-WPAN standards provide data rates from 40 k b/ s.
These standards provide low cost and low speed Communications for power
constrained devices.
2G / 3G / 4G mobile communications:
These are the different generations of mobile communication standards including
second generation (2G including GSM and CDMA). 3rd Generation (3G including
UMTS and CDMA2000) and 4th generation 4G including LTE.
Network / internet layer:
The network layer is responsible for sending of IP datagrams from the source network to
the destination network. This layer Performs the host addressing and packet routing. The
datagrams contain a source and destination address which are used to route them from the
source to the destination across multiple networks. Host Identification is done using the
hierarchy IP addressing schemes such as ipv4 or IPv6.
IPV4: Internet protocol versions for open parents close (IPV4) is there most
deployed internet protocol that is used to identify the device is on a network using
a hierarchy latest scheme. It uses 32-bit addresses scheme that allows total of 2 32
address. As more and more devices got connected to the internet. The Ipv4 has
succeeded by IPv6.

[Page 5]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
IPv6: It is the newest versions of internet protocol and successor to IPv4. IPv6
uses 128-bit address schemes that are lost total of 2 128 are 3.4* 10 38 address.
6Lo WPAN:
IPv6 over low power wireless personal area networks brings IP protocol to the
low power device which have limited processing capability it operates in the 2.4
GHz frequency range and provide the data transfer rate off to 50 kb/s.
Transport layer:
The Transport layer protocols provide end-to-end message transfer capability independent
of the underlying network. The message transfer capability can be set up on connections,
either using handshake or without handshake acknowledgements. Provides functions such
as error control, segmentation, flow control and congestion control.
TCP: Transmission control protocol is the most widely used to transport layer
protocol that is used by the web browsers along with HTTP, HTTPS application
layer protocols email program (SMTP application layer protocol) and file
transfer protocol. TCP is a connection Oriented and stateful protocol while IP
protocol deals with sending packets, TCP ensures reliable transmissions of
packets in order. TCP also provide error deduction capability so that duplicate
packets can be discarded and low packets are retransmitted.
The flow control capability ensures that the rate at which the sender since the data
is not too high for the receiver to process.
UDP: unlike TCP, which requires carrying out an initial setup procedure, UDP is
a connection less protocol. UDP is useful for time sensitive application they have
very small data units to exchange and do not want the overhead of connection
setup. UDP is a transactions oriented and stateless protocol. UDP does not provide
guaranteed delivery, ordering of messages and duplicate eliminations.

[Page 6]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Application layer:
Application layer protocol defines how the application interfaces with the lower layer
protocols to send the data over the network. Data are typically in files, is encoded by the
application layer protocol and encapsulated in the transport layer protocol. Application
layer protocol enables process-to-process connection using ports.
Http: Hypertext transfer protocol is the application layer protocol that forms the
foundations of world wide web http includes commands such as GET, PUT, POST,
DELETE, HEAD, TRACE, OPTIONS etc. The protocol follows a request-
response model where are client sends request to server using the http, commands.
Http is a stateless protocol and each http request is independent father request and
http client can be a browser or an application running on the client example and
application running on an Io T device, mobile applications or other software.
Co AP: Constrained application protocol is an application layer protocol for
machine-to-machine application M2M meant for constrained environment with
constrained devices and constrained networks. Like http Co AP is a web transfer
protocol and uses a request- response model, however it runs on the top of the UDP
instead of TC Co AP uses a client  server architecture where client communicate
with server using connectionless datagrams. It is designed to easily interface with
http like http, Co AP supports method such as GET, PUT, DELETE.
Web Socket: Web Socket protocol allows full duplex communication over a single
socket connection for sending message between client and server. Web Socket is
based on TCP and Allows streams of messages to be sent back and forth between
the client and server while keeping the TCP connection open. The client can be a
browser, a mobile application and Io T device
MQTT: Message Queue Telemetry Transport it is a lightweight message protocol
based on public -subscribe model MQTT uses a client server Architecture by the
clients such as an Io T device connect to the server also called the MQTT broker
and publishers message to topic on the server. The broker forwards the message to
the clients subscribed to topic MQTT is well suited for constrained and
environments.
XMPP: Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol it is a protocol for real-time
communication and streaming XML data between network entities XMPP powers
wide range of applications including messaging, presence, data syndication,
gaming multiparty chat and voice / voice calls. XMPP Allows sending small
chunks of XML data from one network entity to another in real time. XMPP
supports both client to server and server  client communication path.

[Page 7]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
DDS: Data distribution service is the date centric middleware standard for device-
to-device machine to machine communication DDS uses a publish subscribe model
where publisher example device that generate data create topics to which
subscribers per can subscribe publisher is an object responsible for data
distributions and the subscriber responsible for receiving published data. DDS
provide quality of service (Qo S) control and configurable reliability
AMQP: Advanced Message Queuing protocols. it is an open application layer
protocol for business messaging. AMQP support point to point and publish -
subscribe model routing and queuing. AMQP broker receive message from
publisher s example devices or applications that generate data and about them over
connections to consumers publishers publish the message to exchange which then
distribute message copies to queues.
1.3 Logical design of Io T
Logical design of an Io T system refers to an abstract representation of the entities and
process without going into low level specification of the implementations.
1.3.1 Io T functional block
An Io T system comprises of a number of functional blocks that provide the system the
capabilities for identification, sensing, actuation, communication and Management as shown
in the figure 1.3.
Figure 1.3: Functional Blocks of Io T
The function blocks are described as follows.
Devices: An Io T system comprises of the devices that provide sensing, actuation,
monitoring and control function
Communication: communication block handles the communication systems

[Page 8]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Services: An Io T system uses various types of Io T services such as services for
device monitoring, device control services, data publishing services and services
for device Discovery.
Management: Functional blocks provide various functions to govern the Io T system
Security: Security functional block security Io T system and by providing functions
such as application authorization message and content integrity and data security.
Application: Io T application provides and interface that the user can used to
control and monitor various aspects of the Io T system. Application also allows users
to view the system status and view or analyze the processed to data.
1.3.2 Io T communication model
  Request response: Request-response is a Communications model in which the client
sends request to the server and the server responds to the requests. when the server
receives a request, it decides how to respond, if it shows the data retrieved resources
definitions for the response, and then send the response to the client. Access to
response model is a stateless communication model and each request response per is
independent of others. Figure 1.5 shows the block diagram of Request-Response
Communication Model.
Figure 1.5: block diagram of Request-Response Communication Model
  Publish - Subscribe: Respect is a communication model that involve Publishers
brokers and consumers. Publishers are the source of data. Publishers send the data to
the topics which is managed by the broker. Publishers are not aware of the consumer.
Consumers Subscribe to the topic which are managed by the broker. When the broker

[Page 9]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
receives the data for a topic from the publisher, it sends the data to all the subscribed
consumers. Figure 1.6 shows the block diagram of Publish-Subscribe Communication
Model.
Figure 1.6: block diagram of Publish-Subscribe Communication Model.
  Push pull: Push pull is communication model in which the data producers push the data
to queues and the consumers pull the data from the queues. Producers do not need to be
aware of the consumer. Queues help in decoupling the messaging between the
Producers and Consumers. It also acts as a buffer which helps in situations when there
is a mismatch between the rate at which the produces push data and the rate at which
the consumers full the data, Figure 1.7 shows the block diagram of Push-Pull
Communication Model.
Figure 1.7: block diagram of Push-Pull Communication Model.
  Exclusive pair: Exclusive pair is a bi directional, fully duplex communication model
that uses a persistent connection between the client and the server. once the condition is
setup it remains open until the client sends a request to close the connection. client and
server can send messages to each other after connection setup. Exclusive pair is a
stateful Communications model and the server is aware of all the open connections.
Figure 1.8 shows the block diagram of Exclusive Pair Communication Model

[Page 10]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Figure 1.8: block diagram of Exclusive Pair Communication Model
1.3.3 Io T communication APIs
REST- based communication API:
Representational state transfer is a set of architectural principles by which you can design
web services and Web API that focus on a system resource and how resources states are
addressed and transferred. REST API follow the request- response communication model.
The REST architectural constraints apply to the components, connectors, and data
elements, within a distributed hypermedia system. Figure 1.9 shows the communication
between with REST APIs
Figure 1.9: Communication with REST APIs
The REST architectural constraints are as follows:
  Client server: The principle behind the client-server conference separations of concerns
for example client should not be concerned with the storage of data which is their concern of
the server. Similarly, the server should not be concerned about the user interface which is a
concern of the client. separation allows client and server to be independently deployed and

[Page 11]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
updated.
  Stateless: Each request from client to server must contain all the information
necessary to understand the request, and cannot take advantage of any stored context
on the server.
  Catchable: Catch constrain requires that the data within the response to a request be
implicitly or explicitly labeled as catchable or non-catchable. Then a client cache is
given the right to reuse that response data for later, equivalent requests. completely
eliminate some attractions and improve efficiency and scalability.
  Layered system: System constraint come off constraints, constrains the behavior of
components such that each component cannot see beyond the immediate layer with which
they are interacting. Example client cannot tell whether it is connected directly to the end
server or to an intermediary along the way system scalability can be improved allowing
intermediaries to respond to request instead of tender server.
  Uniform interface: Uniform interface constraints requires that the method of
communication between client and server must be uniform. Resources are identified in the
request and separate from the representation of the resource that are returned to the client.
When climbing holds a representation of your resource it has all the information required to
update or delete the resource
  Code on demand: Service can provide executable code script for clients to execute in
their context.
A RESTful web service is a  web API  implemented using HTTP and REST
principles. Figure 1.10 shows the interactions in the request-response model used by
REST.
Figure 1.10 Request-response model used by REST.
RESTful web service is a collection of resources which are represented by URLs. The
client sends requests to these URLs using the methods defined by the HTTP protocol

[Page 12]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
(e.g., GET, PUT, POST, or DELETE), as shown in Table 1.1.
HTTP Resource
Action Example
Method Type
Collection List all the resources in a
GET http://example.com/api/tasks/(list all tasks)
URI collection
Get information about a
GET Element URI http://example.com/api/tasks/1/(get information on task-1)
resource
Collection http://example.com/api/tasks/(create a new task from data
POST Create a new resource
URI provided in the request)
POST Element URI Generally not used
Collection Replace the entire collection http://example.com/api/tasks/(replace entire collection with
PUT
URI with another collection data provided in request)
http://example.com/api/tasks/1/(update task-1 with data
PUT Element URI Update a resource
provided in the request)
Collection
DELETE Delete the entire collection http://example.com/api/tasks/(delete all tasks)
URI
DELETE Element URI Delete a resource http://example.com/api/tasks/1/(delete task-1)
Table 1.1: HTTP request methods and actions
Web Socket based communication API:
Web Socket API allow bi directional, full duplex communication between client and
server. Unlike request-response API allow full duplex communication and do not require
new connection to be set up for each message to be sent. Web Socket communication begins
with connection setup request send by the client to the server. The request is sent over http
and the server interprets it as an upgrade request. If the server support protocol response
to the website handshake response after the connection setup the client and the server can
send data or messages to each other in full duplex model. Web Socket API reduce network
traffic and latency as there is no overhead for connection setup and determination records
to each message. Figure 1.11 shows the exclusive pair model used by Web Socket APIs.
Figure 1.11 shows the exclusive pair model used by Web Socket APIs.

[Page 13]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
1.4 Io T enabling Technologies
It is enabled by several Technologies including wireless sensor networks, cloud computing
big Data Analytics, embedded system, security protocols and architectures,
communication protocols, web service, mobile internet and semantic search engine.
1.4.1 wireless sensor network
Wireless sensor network (wsn) comprises of distributed devices with the sensor which are
used to monitor the environmental and physical conditions. A WSN consists of a number
of end nodes and routers and a coordinator. End nodes have several sensors attached to
them. End node can also act as a router. Routers are responsible for routing the data packet
from end nodes to the coordinator. The coordinator node collects the data from all the
notes coordinator also act as a Gateway that connects the WSN to the internet. Io T systems
are described as follows
  Weather monitoring system using WSN in which the nodes collect temperature,
humidity and other data which is aggregated and analyzed.
  Indoor air quality monitoring system using WSN to collect data on the indoor air
quality and connections of various gases.
  Soil moisture monitoring system using WSN to monitor soil moisture at various
location.
  Surveillance systems use WSN for collecting surveillance data (motion detection
data)
  Smart grid uses wireless sensor network for monitoring the grid at various point.
  Structural health monitoring systems use WSN to monitor the health of
structure by writing vibration data from sensor nodes deployed at various points
in the structure.
1.4.2 Cloud computing:
Cloud Computing is a transformative computing paradigm that involves delivering
applications and services over the internet. Cloud Computing involves provisioning of
computing networking and storage resources on demand and providing these resources as
metered services to the users, in a  pay as you go  model. cloud Computing resources can
be provisioned on demand by the user without requiring interactions with the Cloud
Service Provider. The process of provisioning resources used automatic Cloud Computing
resources can be accessed then it worked using standard access mechanism that provide
platform-independent access through the use of heterogeneous client platforms such as
workstations laptops tablets and Smartphones the computing and storage resources
provided by Cloud Service Provider our food to serve multiple users using multi-Tenancy.
Multi-tenant aspects on the multiple users to be served by the same physical hardware.
Cloud Computing services are offered to user in different forms
Infrastructure as a service (IAAS):
Iaa S provides the user the ability provision computing and storage resources. These

[Page 14]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
resources are provided to the users as virtual machine instances and virtual storage.
Users can start, stop configure and manage the virtual machines instance on the
virtual storage using can deploy operating systems and applications on their choice
on the actual resources provisions in the cloud. Cloud Service Provider manages the
underlying infrastructure.
Platform as a service (Paa S):
platform as a service provides the user the ability to develop and deploy application
in the cloud using the deployment tool application programming interfaces API,
software libraries and services provided by the Cloud Service Provider. The Cloud
Service Provider manages the underlying cloud infrastructure including servers,
network, operating systems and storage.
Software as a service (Saa S):
Provide the user a complete software application of the user interface to the
application itself. The Cloud Service Provider manage the underlying cloud
infrastructure including server, network storage and application software, and the
user is unaware of the underlying architecture of the cloud. Applications are
provided to the user through a thin client interface example Browser application.
Saa S applications are accessed from various client smartphones running different
operating system.
1.4.3 Big Data Analytics
Big data is defined as collections of data set whose volume, velocity in terms of its
temporal variations) or variety, is so large that it is difficult to store, manage, process and
analyze the data using traditional database and data processing tools. Big Data Analytics
involving several steps starting from Data cleaning data munging data processing and
visualization.
Some examples of big data generated by Io T systems are described as follows
1. Sensor data generated by Io T system such as weather monitoring stations
2. Machine sensor data collected from sensor embedded in Industrial and energy system
for monitoring their files and protecting failure
3. Health and fitness data generated by Io T devices such as wearable fitness band.
4. Data generated by Io T system for Location tracking of vehicle.
5. Data generated by retail inventory monitoring system.
Characteristics of big data include:
Volume: Through there is no fixed threshold for volume of data to be considered
as big data, however the term big data is used for massive scale data that is difficult
to store, manage and process using traditional data bases and data processing
architecture. The

[Page 15]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
volume of data generated by modern IT, industrial and Healthcare systems for
example is a growing exponentially driven by the lowering cost of data storage and
processing architectures and the need to extract valuable insights from the data to
improve business processes, efficiency and services to consumer.
Velocity: Velocity is another important characteristic of big data and the primary
reasons for exponential growth of data velocity of the data of a store how fast the
data is generated and how frequently it varies. Modern IT Industrial and other
systems are generating data at increasing the highest speeds.
Variety: Variety refers to the forms of the data. Big data comes in for different forms
such as structured or unstructured data including text data, audio, video and sensor
data.
1.4.4 Communications protocol:
Communications protocols form the backbone of Io T system and enable network
connectivity and coupling to applications. Communications protocols allow device to
exchange data over the network. These protocols define the data exchange formats and
data encoding schemes for devices and routing of packets from source to destination. Other
function of the protocol includes sequence control flow control and transmissions of Lost
packet.
1.4.5 Embedded systems
An Embedded system is computer system that has computer hardware and software
embedded perform specific task. In contrast to general purpose computers or personal
computers which can perform various types of tasks, embedded systems are designed to
perform a specific set of tasks. Embedded system includes Microprocessor and
Microcontroller memory Ram ROM cache networking units (Ethernet WI-FI adaptor)
input/output unit display keyboard, display and storage such as Flash Memory some
embedded system have specialist processes such as digital signal processor DSP graphic
processor and application.
1.5 Io T levels and Deployment Templates
In this section we define various levels of Io T systems with increasing completely. Io T
system comprises of the following components:
1. Device: An Io T device allow identification, remote sensing, actuating and remote
monitoring capabilities.
2. Resources: Resources are software components on the device for accessing and storing

[Page 16]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
information for controlling actuator connected to the device also include software
components that enable network access for the device .
3. Controller service: Controller Service is a native service that runs on the device and
interact with the web services. Controller service sends data from the device to the web
service receive command from the application from controlling the device.
4. Database: Database can be either local or in the cloud and stores the data generated by the
Io T device.
5. Web service: Serve as a link between the device, application database and analysis
components. Web Services can be implemented using HTTP and REST principles or using
website protocol.
A comparison of REST and Web Socket is provided below:
Stateless/stateful: Rest services stateless in nature. Each request contains all the
information needed to process it. Request are independent of each other. Website
on the other hand is stateful in nature where the server maintains the state and is
aware of all the open connections.
Directional / Bi- directional: REST service operates over http and unidirectional.
Request is always sent by a client and the server response to the request. And other
hand website is a bi directional product server to send message to each other
Request response / full duplex: REST service follower request response
Communications model where the client sends request and the server response to
the request. Website and the other hand Allow full-duplex Communications
between the client and server, it means both client and server can send messages to
can independently.
TCP connections: For REST Service each http request involves setting up in a new
TCP connections Web Socket on the other hand involves a single TCP connection
over which the client and server communicate in a full duplex mode.
Headache Overhead: REST service operates over http, and each request is
independent of others. Thus, each request carries http header which is an overhead.
Due to the overhead of http headers, REST is not suitable for real time applications
left hand does not involve overhead of headers. After the initial handshake the client
and server exchange messages with minimal frame information.
Scalability: Scalability is easier in this case of the REST services of request are
independent and no state information needs to be maintained by the server. Thus,
both horizontal out and vertical scaling solutions are possible for REST services.
For web Sockets horizontal scaling can be cumbersome due to stateful nature of the
communication. Since the server maintains the state of our connection, vertical
scaling is easier for Web Socket than horizontal scaling.

[Page 17]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Analysis component: The analysis component is responsible for analyzing the Io T data
and generate results in the form which are easy for the user to understand. Analysis of Io T
data can be performed either locally or in the cloud. Analyzed results are stored in the local
or cloud database.
Application: Io T applications provide an interface that the user can use to control and
monitor various aspects of the Io T system. Applications also allow user to view the system
status and view the processed data.
1.5.1 Io T level 1:
Level One Io T system has a single node / device that performs sensing and/or actuation,
stores data, performs analysis and the host to the application as shown in the figure 1.12.
Level 1 Io T systems are suitable for modeling low cost and low complexity solutions
where the data involving is not big and the analysis requirements are not computationally
intensive.
Let us now consider an example of Level 1 Io T system for home automation.
This system consists of the single node that allows controlling the lights and appliances in
your home remotely. The device used in this system interface with their lights and
appliances using electronic relay switches.
The status information of each light or appliance is maintained in a local database. REST
service deployed locally Allow retrieving and updating the state of each light or appliances
in the status database.
The controller service continuously monitors the state of each light or appliance and triggers
the relay switches accordingly. The applications which is deployed locally has a user
interface for controlling the lights or appliances. since the device is connected to the
internet, the application can be accessed remotely as well.
Figure 1.12: Io T Level-1

[Page 18]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
1.5.2 Io T level 2:
Level 2 Io T system has a single node that performs sensing and/or actuation and local
analysis as shown in figure 1.13. Data is stored in the cloud and application is usually
cloud based systems are suitable for solutions where the data in world is big, however the
primary analysis requirement is not computationally intensive and can be done local itself.
Construct an example of Level 2 Io T system for smart irrigation.
The system consists of the single node that monitor the soil moisture level and control
segregation system. The device used in this system collect soil moisture data from sensor
the controller service continuously monitors the moisture level. If the monster level drops
below a threshold, the irrigation system is turned on. For controlling the irrigation system
actuators such as solenoid valve can be used. Rest Web Services is used for storing and
retrieving data which is stored in the cloud database. A cloud-based application is used for
visualizing the moisture level over a period of time, which can help in making decisions
about irrigation schedules.
Figure 1.13: Io T Level-2

[Page 19]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
1.5.3 Io T Level 3:
Level 3 system has a single node. Data is stored and analyzed in the cloud application is
cloud-based as shown in figure 1.14. Level 3 Io T system suitable for solutions where the
data involved is big and analysis requirements computationally intensive.
Let us considered an example of Level 3 Io T system tracking package handling. The
system consists of a single node that monitors the vibration level for package being
shipped.
The device in the system uses accelerometer and gyroscope sensor for monitoring
vibration levels. The controller service sends sensor data to the cloud in real time using a
website service. The data is stored in the cloud and also visualized using a cloud-based
application.
The analysis component in the cloud can Trigger alert the vibration level becomes greater
than threshold. The benefit of using Web Socket service instead of the REST service this
example the sensor data can be sent in real-time to the cloud. Cloud based application can
subscribe to the sensor data feeds for you in the real-time data.
Figure 1.14: Io T Level-3
1.5.4 Io T level 4
A level 4 Io T system has multiple notes that perform local analysis. Data is stored in the

[Page 20]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
cloud and application is cloud based as shown in the figure 1.15. level 4 contains local and
cloud-based observer notes which can subscribe to and receive information collected in the
cloud from Io T devices. Observer node can process information and use it for various
applications, however observer notes do not perform any control function. level 4 Io T
systems are suitable for solutions where multiple nodes are required the data involved is
big and the analysis requirements are computationally intensive.
let us consider an example of level four Io T system for noise monitoring. The system
consists of multiple notes placed in different locations for monitoring noise level in an
area. In this example with sound sensor. Nodes are independent of each other each node
runs in one controller service that sends the data to the cloud. The data is stored in a cloud
database the analysis of the data collected from a number of notes is done in the cloud
Figure 1.15: Io T Level-4
1.5.5 Io T Level 5:
Io T system has multiple end nodes and one coordinator node as shown in figure 1.16 the
end nodes that perform sensing and / or actuation. Coordinator node collects data from the
entry and send to the cloud. Data is stored and analyzed in the cloud and applications is
cloud based. Level 5 Io T system are suitable example for forest fire detection. The
system consists of multiple nodes placed in different locations for monitoring
temperature, humidity and carbon dioxide levels in a forest. The endnotes in this example

[Page 21]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
are equipped with various sensors such as temperature humidity and to CO2.
The coordinator node collects the data from the end nodes and act as a Gateway that
provides internet connectivity to the Io T system. The controller service on the coordinator
device sends the collected data to the cloud. The data is stored in the cloud database. The
analysis of the data is done in the computing cloud to aggregate the data and make
prediction.
Figure 1.16: Io T Level-5
1.5.6 Io T Level 6:
Io T Level 6 system has multiple Independent and nodes that perform sensing and / or
actuations and send data to the cloud. Data is stored in the cloud and applications is cloud
based as shown in figure 1.17.
The analytics component analyzes the data and stores the results in the cloud database. The
results are visualized with the cloud-based application. The centralized controller is aware
of the status of all the end notes and send control commands to the notes.
Let us consider an example of the level 6 Io T system for weather monitoring. The system
consists of multiple nodes placed in different location for monitoring temperature,
humidity and pressure in an area. The end nodes are equipped with various sensors such
as temperature, pressure and humidity. The end nodes send the data to the cloud in real
time using a Web Socket service. The data is stored in a cloud database. The analysis of the
data is done in the cloud to aggregate the data and make predictions. A cloud-based
applications is used for visualizing the data.

[Page 22]
Internet of Things [BCS701] MODULE 1
Figure 1.17: Io T Level-6
Module Question Bank
1. Describe an example of an Io T system in which information and knowledge are inferred from
data.
2. Why do Io T systems have to be self-adapting and self-configuring?
3. What is the role of things and the Internet in Io T?
4. What is the function of the communication functional block in an Io T system?
5. Describe an example of an Io T service that uses the publish-subscribe communication model.
6. Describe an example of an Io T service that uses Web Socket-based communication.
7. What are the architectural constraints of REST?
8. What is the role of a coordinator in a wireless sensor network?
9. What is the role of a controller service in an Io T system?